Update design doc for message pattern quoting (#503)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/text-vs-code.md

3. Permit non-simple patterns to be quoted and trim unquoted whitespace
4. Trim all unquoted whitespace, but do not permit quoting non-simple patterns
5. Selectively trim patterns (all whitespace is otherwise significant)

### Always Quote

Pros:
- The boundary between pattern and code is always clear.
- The quoting reduces the number of in-pattern escapes to the open/close sequence.
  and the placeholder sequence sigils.
- Since the pattern is already quoted, translators never have to add pattern quotes
  in order to add PEWs to a given pattern.
  This also might avoid some tools forcing escaping on added quotes that are needed.

Cons:
- Requires matching open/close quotes.

### Never Quote Patterns

In this alternative, all non-code whitespace is significant. 
We have to use a slightly different syntax in the example, so that
the boundary between code and pattern works.
>```
>{{
>   match {$var}
>   {when *} This pattern has a space in front (it's between \} and This)
>   {when other}
>      This pattern has a newline and six spaces in front of it
>   {when moo}This pattern has no spaces in front of it, but an invisible space at the end
>}}
>```

Pros:
- WYSIWYG (on steroids)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoids as many escape sequences as possible,
  as `}` does not need escaping in patterns.

```

Cons:
- Probably not a serious alternative: the example

>   includes any number of obvious footguns that have to be addressed

Reviewer: This seems really rather opinionated. In many ways, this is the same as the "Always quote" solution, except that the pattern delimiters are `}…{` instead of `{{…}}`. So the unnamed footguns probably apply to that alternative as well.

Reviewer 2: It is opinionated. When I wrote it, I was being lazy by not enumerating the issues.

> this is the same as the "Always quote" solution, except that the pattern delimiters are }…{ instead of {{…}}. So the unnamed footguns probably apply to that alternative as well.

No, this is incorrect.

`{{...}}` encloses all and only the whitespace that is intentional in the pattern, with `{{` and `}}` forming the pattern boundary. These boundary characters are visible.

`}...{` makes all whitespace in the variant block meaningful. It effectively prohibits a multiline representation of a message, because the newlines are always meaningful. It also means that trailing spaces (which are invisible) have meaning. 

To make a message multiline, you have to put the whitespace inside the key.:

```
{{
match {$var}
{when 0
}This has no newline or space.{
when one}
This has a newline at the start.{
when *} This has a space at the start and six spaces and a newline at the end.      
}}
```

Reviewer: If we take your example above, and after the `match` replace each `}` with `{{` and each `{` with `}}`, we get this:

```
{{
match {$var}
}}when 0
{{This has no newline or space.}}
when one{{
This has a newline at the start.}}
when *{{ This has a space at the start and six spaces and a newline at the end.      
}}
```

Ignoring the specifics of what's happening with the preamble, that seems pretty similar to me. It's just that we're conditioned to look at the `{` and `}` a certain way.

### Permit pattern quoting

In this alternative, non-simple patterns are trimmed, but it is 
possible to use quoting to separate the pattern from code (and prevent trimming)
>```
>{match {$var}}
>{when   0} This has no space in front of it.
>{when one}
>    This has no space or newline in front of it.
>{when few}
>   {{ This has one space at the start and the end. }}
>{when many}   {{ This also has one space start and end. }}
>{when *}{{You can quote patterns even without whitespace.}}
>```

Pros:
- Code is special instead of text.
- Easy to use (best of both worlds?)

Cons:

> - Requires one of the alternate syntaxes

Reviewer: Given that we just ran a "beauty contest" in which these "alternate syntaxes" were preferred over the current `main` syntax by an absolute majority of the participants, this could also be listed as one of the "Pros".

- Has two ways to represent a pattern.

> - May be difficult for translators to add quotes when needed.

Reviewer: As far as I've been able to determine, there are exactly three scenarios in which a translator may need to add leading or trailing spaces to a pattern that starts out without them:
1. When translating a whole-sentence message from a CJK script to a non-CJK script, such that the sentences are concatenated into a single paragraph and need spaces between them. As with all other string concatenations, I would expect for this to be explicitly called out to the translator, so that they may know whether to add the space at the start or end of the pattern.
2. When translating a pattern to Chinese which ends up requiring a leading honorific space. As far as I can tell, this is really rare in dynamic message strings.
3. When the message is expected to be output using a monospace font and fakes either centering or right-alignment by using in-message spaces for indentation, and the first line of the pattern happens to be exactly the maximum length, and so does not need leading spaces. This is sufficiently rare that I'm pretty sure this is only a theoretical possibility, and in any case I'd expect it to be rather clearly called out to the translator.

Given that each of the above only has an impact on the pattern delimiting if the message _also_ has multiple variants _and_ if the translator is not using any tooling that'd take care of the delimiting _and_ if the developer has not pre-emptively delimited the pattern, I would be ok accepting this negative, especially as the downside would be a single missing space in the translation.

### Trim All Unquoted

In this alternative, all non-code whitespace is trimmed
and we do not allow/provide for pattern quoting.
Instead, PEWS whitespace must be individually quoted.

> [!NOTE]
> Whitespace quoting also works in the preceeding alternatives
> because it is an inherent part of the syntax.
> We don't show it in those alternatives because it is
> distracting.

>```
>{match {$var}}
>{when   0} This has no space in front of it.
>{when one}
>    This has no space or newline in front of it.
>{when few}
>   {||} This has one space at the start and the end. {||}
>{when many}   {| |}This also has one space start and end.{| |}
>{when *}
>
>       No amount of whitespace matters before this pattern
>       but all of the whitespace at the end does.
>
>       {||}
>```

Pros:
- Code is special, whitespace is not.
- Makes PEWS into a "special event", alerting developers to the non-I18N aspects of it?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoids as many escape sequences as possible,
  as `}` does not need escaping in patterns.
  
```

Reviewer 3: It needs escaping if it is used as ending of the "wrapping" of the string

Cons:
- Weird and unattractive.

### Selective Trimming

In this alternative, only specific whitespace is automatically trimmed
and the whitespace can be omitted.
This is similar to "Never Quote Patterns" in that all whitespace
is significant **_except_** for a newline, space, or newline space
directly after code:
>```
>{match {$var}}
>{when   0} This has no space in front of it.
>{when one}
> This has no space or newline in front of it.
>{when 1}
>  This has no newline but does have one space in front of it.
>{when few}
>  This has no space or newline in front of it or at the end {when many}This has no spaces or newlines.
>{when 11}
>
> This has a newline and a space at the start and a space-newline at the end
>

> >>{when *}{|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>{when *}{|
```

## Objective

> Decide whether text patterns must always be quoted,
> or whether we allow them to be optionally quoted,
> for non-simple messages in MF2.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:

```suggestion
Decide whether to permit _patterns_ (message text) to be unquoted
when embedded in code. 
Currently all _patterns_ must be quoted in non-simple messages.
```

separated from the text using `{…}` for multi-variant messages.
ICU MessageFormat is the only known format that uses `{…}` to also delimit text.

Formatting and templating are distinct operations with similarities.

> Both interpolate strings by using input values,
> provided as inputs alongisde the formatting pattern string or template,
> to produce a new string.

Reviewer 2: I've been trying to back away from the use of "interpolate" and it strikes me that this could be said more simply. What do you think of:

```suggestion
Both take input values to replace portions of the pattern string or template, producing a new, formatted, string.
```

Formatting usually refers to smaller strings, usually no larger than a sentence,

> whereas templating are used to produce larger strings, usually for text files of various file formats, often for HTML documents.

Reviewer 2: Grammar and clarity suggestions:

```suggestion
whereas templating is typically used to produce larger strings (generally whole documents, such as an HTML file)
```

There are two different styles of templating library design.
Some languages/libraries enable the interopolation of the template substrings through programmatic expressions in "code mode" that print expressions to the output stream 
(ex: [PHP](https://www.php.net/),
[Freemarker](https://freemarker.apache.org/index.html)):
```php
<html>
...
	<?php
		if (true) {

> 			echo '<p>Hello World</p>';

Reviewer 4: Just a nit, but I think both PHP and Freemarker would actually prefer the second method:

```php
<?php if (true): ?>
    <p>Hello, world!</p>
<?php endif ?>
```

Reviewer 3: I didn't even know that is possible.

If I check https://www.w3schools.com/php/php_if_else.asp and https://www.php.net/manual/en/control-structures.if.php the option is not even mentioned.

It is mentioned in the "User Contributed Notes" of the manual.

But I kind of doubt that something that is not even mentioned in the official manual is the preferred way.

If anything this makes the point that having more than one way to do things, some more recommended than others, is not a good thing.

One will argue that PHP is not the best designed language. And it is not.
But do we want MF2 to become that? :-)

So, in American English, the formatter might need to choose between formatting
`You have 1 kilometer to go` and `You have 2 kilometers to go`.

Rarely do messages that need to include leading or trailing whitespace do so due to

> how they will be concatenated with other text,

Reviewer 2: I think this change made the text far less clear. 

To be honest, I would have guessed that you would have replaced the somewhat biased word "Rarely" with something more neutral such as "Some messages need..."

or as a result of being segmented from some larger volume of text.
Based on available data,
no more than 0.3% of all messages and no more than 0.1% of messages with variants
contain leading or trailing whitespace.

However, frequency of occurrence is not an indicator of the importance of leading or trailing whitespace to those authoring such messages.
For example, sometimes such messages are authored in order to achieve a semblance of formatting in contexts that lack rich text presentation styles,
such as operating system widgets.
Even though such messages are usually infrequent relative to the size of all user-facing / transalatable messages,
that is not an indicator of their significance.

> Also importantly, we cannot make assumptions about the validity of leading or trailing whitespace in a message,
> especially since their usage may be entirely unrelated to internationalization issues (ex: sentence agreement disruption by concatenation).

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem clear to me?

I think what you might be trying to say is:

```suggestion
Also, importantly, whether the intentional inclusion of whitespace by a 
message author might be considered "desirable" or might be interpreted 
as "an internationalization bug",
we need to provide the ability of an author to control the content of a given pattern without ambiguity.
```

## Requirements

It should be easy to do simple things; possible to do complex things; and impossible, or at least difficult, to do wrong things.

<details>
<blockquote>
APIs should be easy to use and hard to misuse. It should be easy to do simple things; possible to do complex things; and impossible, or at least difficult, to do wrong things.

—<a href="https://www.infoq.com/articles/API-Design-Joshua-Bloch/">Joshua Bloch, 2008</a>, author of <i>Effective Java</i>, etc.

> </blockquote>

Reviewer 2: Maybe just quote Bloch?

<blockquote>
The Pit of Success: in stark contrast to a summit, a
peak, or a journey across a desert to find victory through many trials and
surprises, we want our customers to simply fall into winning practices by using
our platform and frameworks. To
the extent that we make it easy to get into trouble we fail.
          
—Rico Mariani, MS Research MindSwap Oct 2003. (<a href="https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/blogs/brada/the-pit-of-success">restated by Brad Adams</a>, MS CLR and .Net team cofounder)
</blockquote>
</details>

Developers and translators should be able to read and write the syntax easily in a text editor.

> Translators (and their tools) are not software engineers, so we want our syntax

Reviewer 4: I think it would be good to prioritize the requirements. For example, while I agree that we should, in general terms, make the syntax simple and robust, I would also suggest that the primary consumer of the _message_ syntax are developers. Translators will oftentimes work with just the _pattern_ syntax, through CAT tools.

to be as simple and robust as possible.

> Nesting level is not a requirement.
> People are not parsers, and don't care about the nesting level as a primary concern when reading a message.
> What matters to them is their ability to recognize where a message's pattern starts and where it ends.

Reviewer 2: I see what you're trying to do, but the original requirement didn't say "avoid all nesting". It used "should" and was concerned with depth of nesting and message complexity. A well-known shortcoming of MF1 are the plural/select constructs with their complex use of nested `{...}` sequences. The example below is argument and this is (and claims to be!) "not a requirement" in the requirements section. If you want to talk about nesting like this, talk about it in design considerations?

If you want a requirement, then perhaps:

```suggestion
Nesting of text or code should be as simple as possible, but no simpler.
```

if (foo) print "{{{This is translatable}}}" else print "{{{This is NOT translatable}}}"
if (foo) if (bar) switch (baz) case 1: print "{{{This is translatable, deep}}}" break; default: print "{{{This is NOT translatable, deep}}}"
```

As MessageFormat 2 will be at best a secondary language to all its authors and editors,
it should conform to user expectations and require as little learning as possible.

The syntax should avoid footguns,
in particular as it's passed through various tools during formatting.
The syntax should avoid footguns, in particular as it's passed through various tools during formatting or stored existing file formats, databases, etc.
Very importantly in this regard,
we should minimize the range of characters that need to be escaped in patterns.

ASCII-compatible syntax. While support for non-ASCII characters for variable names,
values, literals, options, and the like are important, the syntax itself should
be restricted to ASCII characters. This allows the message to be parsed
visually by humans even when embedded in a syntax that requires escaping.

Whitespace is forgiving.
We _require_ the minimum amount of whitespace and allow

> authors to format or change unimportant whitespace as much as they want.

Reviewer 2: Why did you remove this? It seems like a good observation about all of our designs.

> However, we want WYSIWYG behavior as much as possible in patterns, meaning that there is minimal visual difference
> between the pattern and its interpolated output,
> and that there is minimal ambiguity.
> This avoids chances for unwanted surprises between the message authoring time expectations and the actual runtime formatted results.

Reviewer 2: This seems like a separate requirement. Note that the core of this conversation is not actually about whether **_patterns_** are WYSIWYG but with the problem of determining pattern _boundaries_.

Requirements language might be more like:

```suggestion

Pattern contents MUST be WYSIWYG. Once a pattern is determined or selected, there should be no surprise about the sequence of characters included in the pattern, including which portions are replaced during formatting.
```

`input`, `local`, `match`, and `when`.

The current syntax and active proposals include some sigil + name combinations,

> such as `:number`, `$var`, `|literal|`, `+bold`, `-bold`, and posibly `@attr`.

Reviewer 2: Typo

```suggestion
such as `:number`, `$var`, `|literal|`, `+bold`, `-bold`, and possibly `@attr`.
```

The current syntax supports unquoted literal values as operands.

> Messages themselves are "simple strings" and must be considered to be WYSIWYG.

Reviewer 2: This is incorrect and the change greatly reduces the impact of the document IMO. The thing that is WYSIWYG is the pattern. In the case of simple messages, this is the whole message. But in the case of complex messages, what you see (`{#input $foo :number minimumFractionDigits=11}`) is not exactly what you get 😉 

The most important part of the original statement here is removed, which reminds readers that this message:

```
myMessage = {{
   {#input $var :number}
   {{You have {$var} message(s)}}
}}
```

Is actually this message in many storage formats:

```
myMessage = {{\n   {#input $var :number}\n   {{You have {$var} message(s)}}\n}}
```

The WYSIWYG nature of representing a message pattern is independent of whether the message is a single line or contains multiple lines.

> There is no restriction that a message must only contain a single line (that is, not contain any newline characters),

Reviewer 2: I would s/message/pattern/g this section (carefully because my suggestion is not always true). Only talk about the message when you intend to include the code.

format, a U+000A LINE FEED might be represented as `\n`, `\012`, `\x0A`, `\u000A`,
`\U0000000A`, `&#xA;`, `&NewLine;`, `%0A`, `<LF>`, or something else entirely).

## Simple Messages

In the Subcommittee meetings following Github discussions on Issues #493 and #499,
the general consensus that formed for simple messages
is that we allow them to be unquoted.

("Simple messages" refers to messages consisting solely of a pattern, and thus are not complex messages.)

Because the simple message pattern consists of the entire message,
the pattern includes any leading or trailing whitespace.

Given simple messages already being decided at a high level,
the design decisions below for the proposed and alternative designs pertain specifically to complex messages.

## Proposed Design

### Start in text, encapsulate message, always quote patterns

Description:

Since simple messages are unquoted (starting in text mode),
complex messages must also start in text mode.

Within a complex message, patterns are always quoted with `{{...}}` or other choice of delimiter.

The entire complex message is also wrapped with `{{...}}` or other choice of delimiter.

> This allows interior "code mode" of message to have flexible whitespace in between tokens

Reviewer 4: What do you think should happen to whitespace outside the entire code block? Should we specify it here as well?

Reviewer 3: We think they should be preserved "as is". If it is not specified, we should.

* consistency with complex (no trimming)
* many of the templating systems don't trim by default, some have it opt-in
* clear what you get
   If you see "   Foo" you know you will see spaces. If we trim ascii spaces, the leading spaces might have nbsp, em-space, en-space, ideographic spaces, etc. So if you read or even edit the string, you can't tell what the result is without a way to inspect those spaces that look all the same.
* as a translator, if I want "  Bill Gates ..." (honorific spaces in Chinese) I don't know if I need to wrap / escape or not.
   Because as a translator I don't know what API is used on that string. Maybe it is MF2, or maybe not.

Reviewer 2: If there is anything "outside" the complex message-wide delimiters, then:

1. It's whitespace that we trim
   a. Or produces an error (worth discussion)
3. or the message is actually a simple message that produces a lot of errors

```
This {{ match {$var} when * {{{$var}}}}} is an interesting message.
```

This evaluates, I think, as:

>This {&#xfffd;} is an interesting message.

Or possibly (with `$var`==123) as:

> This {&#xfffd;}{&#xfffd;} match 123 when * 123{&#xfffd;}{&#xfffd;} is an interesting message.

(both emit a syntax error)

and _around_ quoted patterns.

Pros

* The rule about the whether leading and trailing whitespace is included is simple and unambiguous.
* This matches the WYSIWIG behavior that simple messages preserve.
* The patterns can be detected within the pattern more easily due to the delimiters serving as a visual anchor.

> * Requiring all patterns to be quoted minimizes the number of characters that need to be escaped within a pattern to 3:

Reviewer 4: I think this also holds for at least some of the other proposals.

In fact, if we always quote variant patterns, we must make the _closing_ delimiter special. Theoretically, in other proposals, we could only special-case the opening delimiter, because both code and placeholders would be wrapped in the same delimiter. (Although that would require agreeing to a different way of preserving whitespace than the currently agreed `{{ ... }}`.)

Reviewer 3: > In fact, if we always quote variant patterns, we must make the closing delimiter special.

But we have to do it for all the other proposals too.
Because all allow for optional wrapping.

the 2 pattern delimiter characters and the escape character itself.
* Because the sum of counts of declarations + `match` statement + `when` statements is always
greater than or equal to the number of patterns,
wrapping the entire message once yields less visual noise of repetitive code mode introducer symbols
when there is 1+ declarations in a `match` (selection) message,
or when there are 2+ declarations in a non-`match` complex message.

> Cons:

Reviewer 2: Consider adding that the message closing pattern characters add no value.

Reviewer 3: A bit worse: as a translator you often get strings with no context.
There is no way to know if  through what kind of API the string will go.

So if I get this string "Bill Gates did something" and I have to translate, and I want to put the "honorific space" in front of the name, I don't know how to do it.
Is the message going through MF2 with trimming? Then I have to wrap it in `{  Bill ....}`
But maybe it is not going through MF2.
Then if I wrap it the `{` ... `}` will render on screen "as is", not what you want.

We've seen this:
"The bee" => "L'abbeile" : if the message goes through MF1, the apostrophe needs to be escaped
"I'm 1 in 100" => "Eu sunt 1%" : if the string goes through a printf-like API then I need to escape the `%`

And as a translator I have no why to know what API the dev uses, and I'm not familiar with the escape rules for myriads of APIs.
I am in fact faced with more APIs than a developer.
A dev might do "java + html + js".
A translator often works for many projects, from many companies, so it is exposed to strings consumed by native Windows apps, PHP, some Ruby stuff, C#, SQL, others. And even switch several times per day.

These days you don't pay the bills as a translator if you only handle one single format for one produce from one company.

> * This comes at the cost of an inconsistency in the WYSIWYG patterns are quoted between simple and complex messages.

Reviewer 4: We should discuss here the risk of "two syntaxes in a trench coat." For someone who's only ever seen simple messages, the only syntax rule they can infer is that `{}` is used for placeholders. A whole separate complex-message mode cannot be easily "guessed".

(But see also my comment about considering developers the primary audience for the complex message syntax, so perhaps this is acceptable.)

Reviewer 3: >  "two syntaxes in a trench coat."

Sounds ugly, but there are already templating systems doing this, and didn't prevent adoption, or trigger many complaints.
Heck, when I write HTML with stylesheets and code I have 3 syntaxes in trench coat :-)

In the case of simple messages, the containing format itself implicitly defines the beginning and end of the pattern (example: `"..."`), which is not visible at the level of MF2,
while complex messages use the aforementioned delimiter to quote patterns (ex: `{{...}}`).
* Another potential drawback, specifically in the case of non-`match` complex messages with exactly 1 declaration,
is that this option adds 2 extra delimiters compared to an alternative syntax that doesn't require quoted patterns

> and is designed to minimize delimiter usage only to code mode introducers.

Reviewer 4: We should add some of the other previously discussed drawbacks:

* If the code block is delimited from both sides, users may be tempted to insert text around it.
* If the code block is delimited from both sides, it may be easy to forget the `}}` closing the entire block.
* If we use curlies for patterns and for placeholders, then they serve double duty, which may make the syntax harder to understand, and also harder to make the pattern out visually.

Reviewer 3: adding text after closing is not necessarily a drawback (I have a comment somewhere)

> If the code block is delimited from both sides, it may be easy to forget the }} closing the entire block.

Fair enough.
Maybe make it optional?

I think that `{{` is to make this intentionally ugly. I would probably go with `{#` to enter code mode, and `{` to wrap the patterns.
And yes, it is double douty. But choosing anything else  means that we escape one extra thing.
If we use `<<<` and I want (for some reason `<<< Hello world` as simple text, then we need to escape it.

So we add another escaping rule.
Pros and cons :-)

Reviewer 2: >> If the code block is delimited from both sides, it may be easy to forget the }} closing the entire block.
> Forgetting to type syntax can happen in any alternative option, so this feels like a weaker argument than the previous.

I disagree a bit. Any enclosing syntax is prone to errors, but the argument here is that the more levels of nesting (and the further apart the enclosure bits), the more opportunities for error exist because the user is keeping track of more things.

Note that one of the proposals for "2a" was to have just a starter sigil. This would eliminate the enclosure for the message.

Evaluation:

The pros outweigh the cons, not just in cardinality, but far more importantly, according to the relative weight
our value system places to the requirements met by the pro aspects compared to the con aspects. Namely:

* [high] Unsurprising WYSIWYG behavior from patterns

> * [high] Easy recognition of patterns, even for non-developers

Reviewer 4: To be fair, I've never found ICU MF patterns easy to spot—specifically because they use `{}`.

Reviewer 3: Fair point.

But I've never seen any questions asked for single selections.
(on StackOverflow or internally sites, here and in previous companies)

It gets ugly, even for developers, when you have multiple selections (plural-in-plural, select in plural in ???)
